.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

Over the previous two chapters we have built an approach to modelling
which is open to changing its position in order to view systems in
multiple ways. This approach encourages taking in to account many
different points of view and discourages taking a single, universal
perspective. Different useful views of a system are combined to get an
overall understanding of the system.

This open-ended process of model building is necessarily value-laden
endeavour. We already saw an indication of this in our example of
Hollywood film data: the same data could be used to predict blockbusters
or to reflect over discrimination in the film industry. We also saw it
when we discussed predictive policing (a subject to which we will return
in this chapter). In the coming chapters we will see many more such
examples of values. But first, in this chapter, we look in more depth at
the relational approach and discuss how it can be used to help
incorporate ethical thinking in to an open approach to modelling.

.. _`sec:Afro-feminism`:

Afro-feminism
=============

.. container:: displayquote

   | “Knowledge without wisdom is adequate for the powerful, but wisdom
     is essential for the survival of the subordinate.” Patricia Hill
     Collins :raw-latex:`\cite{collins2002black}`

We already introduced the relational approach in section
`[sec:relational] <#sec:relational>`__. These include Ubuntu, ...
enactive cognitive science and Afro-feminism. It is the latter of these
which we look at more closely now, before (in the next section) using it
to ground a relational ethics approach which aligns with the open
modelling approach we looked at in the previous chapter.

It might, to some readers, appear unusual that we choose Afro-feminism
around which to build an ethical approach to machine learning. After
all, the writers who developed Black feminist thought were not initially
concerned with the best way to use mathematical models. However, these
writers were engaged in describing a way of thinking that resisted
universalism. Moreover, they were concerned with describing the
importance of practice and lived experience in the accumulation of
knowledge. And they did so with an intimate knowledge of how inequality
and discrimination can be perpetrated by systems when lived experience
is neglected. Out of all of the relational approaches it is thus,
Afro-feminism thought that offer us most when in providing concrete
tools upon which we can build a relational approach.

Syliva Tamale

In this section, we detail the above points in more detail, with
reference, in particular, to the work by two prominent advocates of
Afro-feminist epistemology, Patricia Hill Collins and bell hooks. Then
in the next section, we build these in to our own relational ethics
approach to machine learning and mathematical modelling.

Drawing on core differences between the dominant Western tradition and
the Afro-feminist perspective, Collins broadly identifies two types of
knowledge about the world: *book learning* and *wisdom*. For Collins,
book learning is reasoning about the world made from a distance in a
rational way. This form of knowledge aspires to arrive at “the objective
truth” that transcends context, time, specific and particular
conditions. Wisdom, on the other hand, comes from concrete lived
experience. It does not have an ambition to unify, but rather to
document our experiences. Wisdom grows as we experience life, but is
never complete.

ABEBA: I HAVE MADE CHANGES HERE TO ADDRESS DOUBLE USAGE OF KNOWLEDGE IN
YOUR THESIS TEXT. OK?

Collins emphasizes that people are not passive cognizers that
contemplate and grasp the world in abstract forms from a distance
knowledge. Understanding instead emerges from concrete lived experiences
:raw-latex:`\cite{collins2002black}`. Formal education is thus not the
only route to knowledge and in many cases is not the most important.
Wisdom should be given high credence in assessing knowledge claims.

For Collins, wisdom takes for granted that there exists an inherent
connection between what one does and how one thinks. EXAMPLE. bell hooks
:raw-latex:`\cite{hooks1989talking}` (following a pedagogical approach
proposed by Paulo Freire :raw-latex:`\cite{freire1996pedagogy}`)
emphasises taking a subject to subject approach, in contrast rather than
as subject to object approach. When we undertake to study a social
system, in particular, we should acknowledge our part of it: we should
see ourselves as one subject addressing another subject. By resisting
seeing the account of any one subject as “definitive” or “authorative”,
we “create a climate where scholarship from diverse groups ...
flourish[es] and [are] better able to appreciate the significance of
scholarship that emerges from a particular race, sex, and class
perspective.” (page 45, :raw-latex:`\cite{hooks1989talking}`). Our
socio-cultural background — often refered to as our identity —
necessarily plays a role in how we study another subject.

The type of wisdom described by Collins is not worked out in isolation
from others, but is developed in dialogue with the community. Patricia
Hill Collins :raw-latex:`\cite{collins2002black}` gives several examples
in the context of African American culture which illustrate this.
DISCUSSION page 261 and CHURCH page 263. ....

The distinction between book-learnt knowledge and wisdom experienced
through life is especially important when the type of knowledge in
question concerns *oppression*, *structural discrimination*, and
*racism*. At its heart, the Afro-feminist approach to knowing contends
that concrete experiences are primary, and abstract reasoning secondary.
It is wisdom, and not “book learning”, that enables one to identify and
resist oppression. It follows that concepts such as ethics and justice
need to be grounded in concrete events informed by lived experience of
the most marginalized, individuals and communities that pay the highest
price when injustice is perpetrated. Knowing and being are active
processes that are necessarily political and ethical.

It is only that experience, which can change an unjust system or design
a new approach to societal issues. Audre Lorde famously said that “Those
of us who stand outside the circle of this society’s definition of
acceptable women; those of us who have been forged in the crucibles of
difference – those of us who are poor, who are lesbians, who are Black,
who are older – know that survival is not an academic skill. It is
learning how to take our differences and make them strengths. For the
master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house.”
:raw-latex:`\cite{lorde2003master}` The experience of those who are
oppressed is not merely useful in designing systems which can
potentially lead to further oppression. It is primary.

.. _`sec:ethics built on`:

Ethics Built on Relationality
=============================

Let us summarise where we have come so far in this book. We started by
acknowledging that complex systems are open-ended: they carry with them
their history and a social context. They are ambiguous, messy, fluid,
non-determinable, contextual and never completely understood. There are
always new and different ways of looking at a complex system, and thus
different ways of creating models. In some cases, most notably games or
some physical systems, it is possible to close the system off. But there
are many more systems, which remain open and for which we can never find
a final all-encompasing view.

We then identified two broad approaches (or cultures) in modelling: one
which is data-driven and emphasises prediction; the other which
emphasises mechanisms and human understanding. For some closed systems,
board games and even weather prediction, the data-driven approach often
provides the best way of .

For open systems, both data-driven and mechanistic approaches can be
employed, but it is here that the benefits of elucidating a mechanism
are greatest. The mechanistic approach allows us to discuss and reason
about models, compare our assumptions and reach conclusions in a way
that cannot be achieved in a purely data-driven approach. The open
approach engages us in an active discussion about the complex systems we
want to model. As a result, we need to take our values and ethics in to
our modelling approach; in the decisions we make about what to include
and leave out of a model. In general, the more open a problem is, the
more pressing ethical issues become.

It is here relational thinking comes in. We can think of the
mathematical modelling itself as primarily book knowledge, a set of
methods for building closed models of particular aspects of a system. On
the other hand, the way in which we approach a system as a whole
requires lived experience and wisdom: an understanding of the design
decisions made when we use models and an understanding of the system we
are applying our model to. A relational approach prioritises an open
dialogue around modelling choices, over the closed knowledge provided by
technical details of models.

bell hooks writes that "dialogue implies talk between two subjects, not
the speech of subject and object.” :raw-latex:`\cite{hooks1989talking}`.
In terms of modelling, such a dialogue involves discussing and comparing
the different ways we view a system, rather than silently applying one
or a small number models to that system. A participatory discussion
should be opened up about how to approach a problem.

In the following subsections, we provide some principles which can help
structure a relational approach. To make these ideas concrete, we
consider the, in the context predictive policing: using algorithms to
decide which areas of a city police should patrol. Such algorithms are
used in many US cities

Here, we use predictive policing in order to illustrate the types of
questions that relational ethics should ask. We don’t necessarily give
answers: although we encourage the reader to think of their own. In
later chapters of the book, we will use these principles to challenge

-  Paragraph the idea itself. (Abeba can write long, David shorten)

-  The literature (Abeba loads and loads)

-  How to ask a question about predictive policing. (David)

.. _`sec:subjectobject`:

Subject or Object
-----------------

The quote above from bell hooks makes a key distinction between subject
and object. The

In the predictive policing example, the people living in a city become
objects to be monitored and controlled.

.. _`sec:disproportionally`:

Disproportionally impacted
--------------------------

The harm, bias, and injustice that emerge from algorithmic systems
varies and is dependent on the training and validation dataset, the
underlying taken for granted assumptions of the model, and the specific
context the system is deployed in, amongst other factors. However, one
thing remains constant: individuals and communities that are at the
margins of society are disproportionally impacted. Some examples include
object detection :raw-latex:`\cite{wilson2019predictive}`; search engine
results :raw-latex:`\cite{noble2018algorithms}`; recidivism
:raw-latex:`\cite{angwin2016machine}`; gender recognition
:raw-latex:`\cite{buolamwini2018gender}`; gender classification
:raw-latex:`\cite{hamidi2018gender,barlassee2020}`; and medicine
:raw-latex:`\cite{obermeyer2019dissecting}`. Wilson et.al.’s findings in
:raw-latex:`\cite{wilson2019predictive}`, for instance, demonstrate that
object detection systems designed to predict pedestrians display higher
error rates identifying dark skin pedestrians while light-skinned
pedestrians are identified with higher precision. The use of such
systems situates the recognition of subjectivity with skin tone where
whiteness is taken as ideal mode of being. Furthermore, gender
classification systems often operate under essentialist assumptions and
operationalize gender in a trans-exclusive way resulting in
disproportionate harm to trans people
:raw-latex:`\cite{keyes2018misgendering,hamidi2018gender}`.

Given that harm is distributed disproportionately and that the most
marginalized hold the epistemic privilege to recognize harm and
injustice, relational ethics asks that for any solution that we seek,
the starting point be the individuals and groups that are impacted the
most. This means we seek to centre the needs and welfare of those that
are disproportionally impacted and not solutions that benefit the
majority. Most of the time this means not simply creating a fairness
metric for an existing system but rather questioning what the system is
doing, particularly examining its consequences on minoritized and
vulnerable groups. This requires us to zoom out and draw the bigger
picture. A shift from asking narrow questions such as *how can we make a
certain dataset representative?* to examining larger issues such as
*what is the product or tool being used for? Who benefits? Who is
harmed? What are the factors that our model has taken into consideration
(and what factors are left out as irrelevant). And are the factors we
failed to consider or deemed irrelevant indeed so?*

To some extent, the idea of *centring the disproportionally impacted*
shares some commonalities with aspects of *participatory design*, where
design is treated as a fundamentally participatory act
:raw-latex:`\cite{slavin2016design}` and even aspects human-centered
design :raw-latex:`\cite{irani2010postcolonial}` where individuals or
groups whom technology is supposed to serve are placed at the centre.
However, the idea of *centring the disproportionally impacted* goes
further than human-centered or participatory design as broadly
construed. While the latter approaches can neglect those at the margins
:raw-latex:`\cite{harrington2020forgotten}`, shy away from power
asymmetries and structural inequalities that permeate the social world,
and “mirror individualism and capitalism by catering to consumer’s
purchasing power at the expense of obscuring the hidden labor that is
necessary for creating such system” :raw-latex:`\cite{Lioyd2020}` for
the former, acknowledging these deeply ingrained structural hierarchies
and hidden labour is a central starting point. In this regard, with a
great emphasis on asymmetrical power relations, works such as
Costanza-Chock :raw-latex:`\cite{costanza2018design}`’s *Design Justice*
and Harrington :raw-latex:`\cite{harrington2020forgotten}`’s *The
Forgotten Margins* are examples that provide insights into how centring
the disproportionately impacted might be realized through design led by
marginalized communities.

The central implication of this in the context of a justice centred data
practice is that minoritized populations that experience harm
disproportionately hold the epistemic authority to recognize injustice
and harm given their lived experience. Understandings these concepts and
building just technologies therefore, needs to proceed from the
experience and testimony of the disproportionately harmed. The starting
point towards efforts such as ethical practice in machine learning or
theories of ethics, fairness, or discrimination needs to centre the
material condition and the concrete consequences an algorithmic tool is
likely to bring on the historically marginalized. Having said that,
these are efforts with extreme nuances and magnitudes of complexity in
reality. For example, questions such as ‘how might a data worker engage
vulnerable communities in ways that surface harms, when it is often the
case that algorithmic harms may be secondary effects, invisible to
designers and communities alike? What questions might be asked to help
anticipate these harms?’, ‘how do we make frictions, often the site of
power struggles, visible?’ are difficult questions but questions that
need to be negotiated and reiterated by communities, data workers and
model developers.

Modesty
-------

The first rule of thumb when dealing with complex systems is the
realization and acknowledgement that the phenomena that we are modelling
does not have one “right” single solution/answer. Any and all answers
will always remain incomplete as complex systems are open and dynamic
means that they never come to completion. Completion will simply mark
the death of a system. This means that we should always be modest with
our claims and models.

A relational approach shifts toward a more humble and modest
understanding complex systems such as people, knowledge and social
systems. .... This is also a call for rethinking concepts such as data,
ethics, models, matrices of oppression, and structural inequalities as
inherently interlinked and processual.

Such an approach cannot be thought of in terms of universal principles
or a set of out-of-the-box tools that can be implemented.

Broaden understanding
---------------------

Not every human condition is not a problem to be solved. Complex
systems, especially, within the domain of human and social affairs
constitute long standing questions that have been contemplated for
centuries with no clear answers means that 1) your model is not the
first one to deal with these questions so go back and lean on the
shoulders of giants and 2) these issues are unlikely to be “solved” once
and for all. Thus, in approaching, framing, asking and “answering”
questions of complex systems, look back at the historical body of work
(outside your narrow and technical field) and build on that.

Critical reflection
-------------------

The search for irony is an internal process of challenging yourself as a
researcher. One example is avoiding the temptation of low hanging fruit:
if it feels that a theoretical result, which has no obvious application
but is publishable and might attract interest from your peers, is within
reach then make a brief note of how it might be solved (either for
yourself or published in a blog) and then focus your attentions
elsewhere. Use a variety of methods: Instead of polishing our own
favourite lens and describing how it reflects white light, we should
make use of every lens in our camera bag to get a multitude of different
pictures and angles on our subject. We should treat the economy or
social systems just as we treat the human body in Blanchard et al.’s
example: as a portrait, as a mannequin, or as a pig. There are so many
different ways to see ourselves and our society, we need to use them all
to get as full a picture as possible. Examples can be seen in the study
of collective animal behaviour, where different modelling and
experimental approaches interact in the study of animal groups (Sumpter,
2010).

Reject notions of neutrality
----------------------------

Systems cannot be modelled from the view from nowhere. The observer (and
her objectives, values, and interests) is necessarily part of the model.
When modelling human behaviour and social systems, which are contested
and value-laden, there is no neutral lens. The more diverse the
perspective, the fuller the picture the model produces.

Create ambitious theory
-----------------------

????? Qualify for radicallity?

Develop entirely new lenses – radically theories of how to view complex
systems. Some pointers in the direction include research in artificial
life, using and developing online games where humans interact with
simulations and investigating novel cellular automata (see figure 2).
The common theme is an open-ended attempt to identify emergent
phenomena, without ever trying to close the system with an exhaustive
mathematical analysis. Instead of stifling the use of mathematics, a
true complexity science pushes us to be more creative, to take risks and
allow ourselves to be spectacularly wrong.

Embrace ambiguity
-----------------

Complexity science’s gradual slip back into reductive science is driven
in part by the desire for control, certainty, universality, and absolute
objectivity (again, the view from nowhere) (Birhane, 2021). However,
when dealing with the messy, ambiguous and value-laden nature of complex
systems, these desires are an illusion. In an academic ecology that
rewards a false sense certainty, it is difficult to sell incomplete
answers. Acknowledging that we never have a full grasp of complex
phenomena or complete description of a system in its entirety —
embracing ambiguity, being humble about our models, and being
comfortable with “we don’t know” — can create a better culture for
everyone.

Acknowledge power dynamics
--------------------------

Since knowing is a relational affair, who enters into the knower-known
relations matters. Within the fields of computing and data sciences, the
*knower* is heavily dominated by privileged groups of mainly elite,
Western, cis-gendered, and able-bodied white men
:raw-latex:`\cite{broussard2018artificial}`. Given that knower and known
are closely tied, this means that most of the knowledge that such fields
produce is reduced to the perspective, interest, and concerns of such
dominant group. Subsequently, not only are the most privileged among us
restricted to producing partial knowledge that fits a limited worldview
(while such knowledge, tools, models, and technologies they produce are
forced onto all groups, often disproportionately onto marginalized
people), they are also poorly equipped to recognize injustice and
oppression :raw-latex:`\cite{Berenstain2016}`. D’Ignazio and F. Klein
:raw-latex:`\cite{d2020data}` call this phenomenon *the privilege
hazard*. This means that minoritized populations 1) experience harm
disproportionally and 2) are better suited to recognize harm due to
their epistemic privilege :raw-latex:`\cite{on1993marginality}` while
the reverse holds for those building and deploying models.

The Master’s tools
------------------

Checklists can be reductive
---------------------------

Very nature of these systems, the list is inexausable. These systems are
changing and moving. The number of items you can list is endless.

Relational versus Rational
==========================

Rational presented as a given.

Current data practices, for the most part, follow the rational model of
thinking where data are assumed to represent the world “out there” in a
“neutral” way. Yet, not only is it fallacious to assume complex social
reality can be fully represented by data, the process of data
collection, analysis and interpretation of results is a value-laden
endeavour. In the process of data collection, for example, the data
scientist decides what is worth measuring (making some things visible
and others invisible by default) and how. In the process of data
cleaning, rich information that provides context about which data are
collected and how datasets are structured is stripped away. Emphasizing
the importance of contexts for datasets, Loukissas
:raw-latex:`\cite{loukissas2019all}` has proposed a shift into thinking
in terms of *data settings* instead of *datasets*.

The rational worldview that aspires to an “objective” knowledge from a
“God’s eye view” has resulted in the treatment of the researcher as
invisible, their interests, values, and background as inconsequential.
In contrast, for Afro-feminist thought, the researcher is an important
participant in the knowledge production process
:raw-latex:`\cite{nnaemeka2004nego}`. For Sarojini Nadar
:raw-latex:`\cite{nadar2014stories}`, coming to know is an active and
participatory endeavour with the power to transform. Consequently, data
and our models portray and represent certain mode of reality while
leaving out others.

The relational approach can be contrasted to many Western approaches,
which were concerned with finding ways of seperating these three
aspects. For example, Descarte ....

Similarly, in the 1920’s logical positivism sought to categorise
statements we make about the world as being synthetic (about the complex
real world), analytical (about the properties of models) and nonsense
(about value judgements).

No boundaries
-------------

Before we delve into that, it is worth reemphasising that while the
rational worldview tends to see knowledge, people, and reality in
general as stable, for relational perspectives, we are fluid, active,
and continually becoming. Nonetheless, the relational vs rational divide
is not something that can be clearly demarcated but overlaps with fuzzy
boundaries. Some approaches might prove difficult to fit in either
category while others serve to bridge the gap – Harding’s
:raw-latex:`\cite{harding1992rethinking}` *Strong Objectivity* is one
such example that links relational and rational approaches. Furthermore,
the relational and rational traditions exist in tension with a continual
push and pull. For example, complexity science is a school of thought
that emerged from this tension.

Language games
--------------

Western philosophy has investigated similar ideas to those contained
within Ubuntu. In Anglo-American philosophy, these start with the later
work of Ludvig Wittgenstein. He formaulated the idea of langauge games,
which very much parallels the approach we take above of taking snapshots
of a system.

Postmodernismis sometimes used in terms of derision by some scientists,
who portray it as the opposite of a scientific approach. For example,

These criticisms of As Cilliers pointed out, in his book Complexity and
Postmodernism,
